In engineering, there are traditionally three opposing metrics that must all be 
maximized to form the best product. They vary with the type of product, but can 
be classified in three general areas: performance, size, and cost. It is easy 
to create a product that is large and low cost, but by default it will be low 
quality and unperformant. Creating a product that effectivly maximizes all 
three of these areas requires extensive engineering and the designers must use 
the resources available in the most efficient way possible. Good compromises 
are required to balance the tension between these three goals. Computer systems 
designers have been very successful in achieving all three aims at the same 
time through principled organization of transistors and memory components. 
Examination of the organization of computer systems leads to useful conclusions 
about good engineering.

The memory hierarchy is the organization of different types of memory around 
the computer processor, and it is a great example of maximizing the three 
metrics. Ideal memory would have the high access speed of SRAM, the low cost of 
hard disk drives, and the large size available with hard disks. No single block 
of silicon can fulfill these requirements, so computer engineers have 
integrated different types of memory in a specific hierarchy that gets as close 
as possible to the performance, speed, and economy of this theoretical ideal 
memory. The principle behind the memory hierarchy is this: locate small blocks 
of fast, expensive RAM close to the processor, and larger, slow memory 
components such as hard disk drives and SSD's further away from the processor. 
Ideally, the processor will rarely fetch data from the slow memory, but it will 
have been previously cached in RAM. When the processor needs a memory word from 
the hard disk, it is brought back with the entire block of memory around it. 
The principle of locality indicates that memory is consumed by the processor in 
clusters. If a given address is needed at time t, the next memory at the 
address right after that will likely be needed at time t+1. The memory bus is 
many bits wide so the cost to bring back a block of memory is not 
proportionally higher than to bring back a single word. Hit ratio refers to the 
number of times the processor finds the next memory address in cache divided by 
the number of memory accesses. Miss penalty is proportional to the number of 
times the processor must access memory that has not been cached.

Access time is only one consideration when measuring memory speed. Cycle time 
is access time in addition to the settling time required between subsequent 
memory reads to allow the system to stabilize. Interleaved memory is a memory 
layer that is composed of multiple identical components instead of one large 
component. Consecutive memory words are placed in different components, the 
goal being that no two consecutive memory acesses will be on the same chip. 
This give settling time to each component after a memory call, but the 
processor is not affected.

The exploitation of the memory hierarchy crystalizes to one major idea: 
distributed, modular systems where workload is shared between multiple units is 
the way to gain efficiency when the maximum performance of individual 
components has already been achieved. In interleaved memory, computer engineers 
mitigated delays due to settling time by increasing the number of components at 
work so that at any point one of them is always ready to be accessed. The 
memory hierachy also takes advantage of the strengths of different kinds of 
components, combining them in an organization that minimizes the weaknesses of 
each. Another example of these concepts of parallel work distribution and 
specialization is found in multiple issue pipelines. Processor design reached 
the point where adding more stages to the pipline did not increase performance 
and the clock rate could not be turned up any more. Adding more workers in the 
form of more pipelines increases throughput. It also allows for efficiency 
gains due to specialization, since pipelines can be specialized to handle 
different instruction formats. Specializing systems and adding components 
increases the complexity of designs, but it is the only way to make systems 
that are performant, large scale, and economical at the same time.

The most advanced computing systems built today make extensive use of large 
numbers of specialized components to maximize efficiency. At Intel Unleashed 
2021, CEO Pat Gelsinger introduced the Ponte Vecchio, a palm-sized block of 
100 billion transistors that can spin up 1 petaflop per second and is targeted 
at the high performance computing sector. The secret to its compact size is 
specialization of components. The Ponte Vecchio is a System-in-Package (SiP) 
made up of 40 tiles, CPU's, GPU's, and FPGA's, each designed to handle a 
certain type of workload such as machine learning. Intel indicates that 
customers will be able to specify which tiles are included in this package, 
customizing the components to optimize for performance, low power consumption, 
or some other metric. This reflects a trend in computing as the industry moves 
from System-on-Chip (SoC) to SiP designs. SiP allows engineers to take 
advantage of highly specialized systems without having to do the work of 
integrating the individual components like CPU, GPU, RAM, and FPGA's on the 
printed circuit board. SiP also allows for 3d design - components can be 
stacked vertically to save space. SiP is the most exciting exemplification in 
the computing industry of enabling complex systems made of specialized 
components. These systems are more efficient than a single multi-purpose chip, 
and SiP makes it possible to design systems that use many components. This 
trend towards specialization has been present for a long time in the computing 
industry, as seen inmultiple issue pipelines and exploitation of the memory 
hierarchy, and SiP is just one more manifestation of it.